Components in Angular

What is a Component?

A component is a basic building block of an Angular application.
It represents a part of the user interface (UI) and the associated logic.
Components are typically designed to be reusable and self-contained.
Creating a Component

You can create a component manually or using the Angular CLI (Command Line Interface) with the ng generate component component-name command.

Example:

ng generate component my-component

Anatomy of a Component

Each component consists of three primary parts:

Component Class (component-name.component.ts):

The component class is written in TypeScript and contains the component's logic and data.
It is decorated with the @Component decorator, which provides metadata about the component, such as the selector, template, and styles.
Component Template (component-name.component.html):

The template is an HTML file that defines the structure of the component's view.
You can use interpolation, directives, and data binding to display dynamic content.
Component Styles (component-name.component.css, component-name.component.scss, or component-name.component.less):

The styles file contains the component's CSS or SCSS code.
You can use CSS classes to style the component.
Component Metadata

The @Component decorator provides metadata that configures the component:

selector: A CSS selector that identifies an element in the DOM where the component will be rendered.
template or templateUrl: The HTML template used to render the component's view.
styleUrls: An array of external CSS/SCSS/LESS files used to style the component.
providers: An array of services or dependencies that the component requires.
Data Binding

Data binding allows you to bind data from the component class to the component template and vice versa.

Interpolation: Data is displayed in the template using double curly braces {{ }}.

Property Binding: You can bind to an element's property (e.g., disabled, src) using square brackets [ ].

Event Binding: You can bind to an element's events (e.g., click, input) using parentheses ( ).

Component Lifecycle

Components have a lifecycle that includes events like ngOnInit, ngOnChanges, and ngOnDestroy. These lifecycle hooks allow you to perform actions at specific moments during a component's existence.
Input and Output

Components can communicate with other components by using @Input and @Output properties.

@Input: Allows a parent component to pass data to a child component.
@Output: Allows a child component to emit events to a parent component.

@viewChild/viewChildren

template reference variables

Component Interaction

Components can interact with one another, and this interaction can be hierarchical, where parent components interact with child components and vice versa.
Component-Based Architecture

Angular applications are structured around a component-based architecture, where different parts of the UI are represented as components.
This architecture promotes reusability and modularity, making it easier to maintain and scale applications.
Creating a Component Hierarchy

You can create a component hierarchy, where a parent component encapsulates child components. This hierarchy allows you to break down complex UIs into smaller, manageable parts.